<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV: Oxford—The Master and Tutor of Lazarus</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Oxford⁠—The Master and Tutor of Lazarus</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin, as we have said, had but a sad walk of it under the trees of Plumstead churchyard. He did not appear to any of the family till dinnertime, and then he seemed, as far as their judgement went, to be quite himself. He had, as was his wont, asked himself a great many questions and given himself a great many answers; and the upshot of this was that he had sent himself down for an ass. He had determined that he was much too old and much too rusty to commence the manoeuvres of lovemaking; that he had let the time slip through his hands which should have been used for such purposes; and that now he must lie on his bed as he had made it. Then he asked himself whether in truth he did love this woman; and he answered himself, not without a long struggle, but at last honestly, that he certainly did love her. He then asked himself whether he did not also love her money, and he again answered himself that he did so. But here he did not answer honestly. It was and ever had been his weakness to look for impure motives for his own conduct. No doubt, circumstanced as he was, with a small living and a fellowship, accustomed as he had been to collegiate luxuries and expensive comforts, he might have hesitated to marry a penniless woman had he felt ever so strong a predilection for the woman herself; no doubt Eleanor’s fortune put all such difficulties out of the question; but it was equally without doubt that his love for her had crept upon him without the slightest idea on his part that he could ever benefit his own condition by sharing her wealth.</p>
			<p>When he had stood on the hearthrug, counting the pattern and counting also the future chances of his own life, the remembrances of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bold’s comfortable income had certainly not damped his first assured feeling of love for her. And why should it have done so? Need it have done so with the purest of men? Be that as it may, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin decided against himself; he decided that it had done so in his case, and that he was not the purest of men.</p>
			<p>He also decided, which was more to his purpose, that Eleanor did not care a straw for him, and that very probably she did care a straw for his rival. Then he made up his mind not to think of her any more, and went on thinking of her till he was almost in a state to drown himself in the little brook which ran at the bottom of the archdeacon’s grounds.</p>
			<p>And ever and again his mind would revert to the Signora Neroni, and he would make comparisons between her and Eleanor Bold, not always in favour of the latter. The signora had listened to him, and flattered him, and believed in him; at least she had told him so. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bold had also listened to him, but had never flattered him; had not always believed in him; and now had broken from him in violent rage. The signora, too, was the more lovely woman of the two, and had also the additional attraction of her affliction⁠—for to him it was an attraction.</p>
			<p>But he never could have loved the Signora Neroni as he felt that he now loved Eleanor; and so he flung stones into the brook, instead of flinging in himself, and sat down on its margin as sad a gentleman as you shall meet in a summer’s day.</p>
			<p>He heard the dinner-bell ring from the churchyard, and he knew that it was time to recover his self-possession. He felt that he was disgracing himself in his own eyes, that he had been idling his time and neglecting the high duties which he had taken upon himself to perform. He should have spent this afternoon among the poor at <abbr>St.</abbr> Ewold’s, instead of wandering about at Plumstead, an ancient, lovelorn swain, dejected and sighing, full of imaginary sorrows and Wertherian grief. He was thoroughly ashamed of himself, and determined to lose no time in retrieving his character, so damaged in his own eyes.</p>
			<p>Thus when he appeared at dinner he was as animated as ever and was the author of most of the conversation which graced the archdeacon’s board on that evening. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding was ill at ease and sick at heart, and did not care to appear more comfortable than he really was; what little he did say was said to his daughter. He thought that the archdeacon and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin had leagued together against Eleanor’s comfort, and his wish now was to break away from the pair and undergo in his Barchester lodgings whatever Fate had in store for him. He hated the name of the hospital; his attempt to regain his lost inheritance there had brought upon him so much suffering. As far as he was concerned, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quiverful was now welcome to the place.</p>
			<p>And the archdeacon was not very lively. The poor dean’s illness was of course discussed in the first place. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Grantly did not mention <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope’s name in connection with the expected event of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Trefoil’s death; he did not wish to say anything about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope just at present, nor did he wish to make known his sad surmises; but the idea that his enemy might possibly become Dean of Barchester made him very gloomy. Should such an event take place, such a dire catastrophe come about, there would be an end to his life as far as his life was connected with the city of Barchester. He must give up all his old haunts, all his old habits, and live quietly as a retired rector at Plumstead. It had been a severe trial for him to have <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Proudie in the palace, but with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope also in the deanery he felt that he should be unable to draw his breath in Barchester close.</p>
			<p>Thus it came to pass that in spite of the sorrow at his heart, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin was apparently the gayest of the party. Both <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Grantly were in a slight degree angry with him on account of his want of gloom. To the one it appeared as though he were triumphing at Eleanor’s banishment, and to the other that he was not affected as he should have been by all the sad circumstances of the day⁠—Eleanor’s obstinacy, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope’s success, and the poor dean’s apoplexy. And so they were all at cross-purposes.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding left the room almost together with the ladies, and then the archdeacon opened his heart to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin. He still harped upon the hospital. “What did that fellow mean,” said he, “by saying in his letter to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bold that if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding would call on the bishop, it would be all right? Of course I would not be guided by anything he might say, but still it may be well that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding should see the bishop. It would be foolish to let the thing slip through our fingers because <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bold is determined to make a fool of herself.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin hinted that he was not quite so sure that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bold would make a fool of herself. He said that he was not convinced that she did regard <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope so warmly as she was supposed to do. The archdeacon questioned and cross-questioned him about this, but elicited nothing, and at last remained firm in his own conviction that he was destined, <i xml:lang="fr">malgré lui</i>, to be the brother-in-law of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin strongly advised that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding should take no step regarding the hospital in connection with, or in consequence of, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope’s letter. “If the bishop really means to confer the appointment on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding,” argued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin, “he will take care to let him have some other intimation than a message conveyed through a letter to a lady. Were <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding to present himself at the palace, he might merely be playing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope’s game;” and thus it was settled that nothing should be done till the great <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne’s arrival, or at any rate without that potentate’s sanction.</p>
			<p>It was droll to observe how these men talked of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding as though he were a puppet, and planned their intrigues and small ecclesiastical manoeuvres in reference to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding’s future position without dreaming of taking him into their confidence. There was a comfortable house and income in question, and it was very desirable, and certainly very just, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding should have them; but that at present was not the main point; it was expedient to beat the bishop and, if possible, to smash <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope had set up, or was supposed to have set up, a rival candidate. Of all things the most desirable would have been to have had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quiverful’s appointment published to the public and then annulled by the clamour of an indignant world, loud in the defence of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding’s rights. But of such an event the chance was small; a slight fraction only of the world would be indignant, and that fraction would be one not accustomed to loud speaking. And then the preferment had, in a sort of way, been offered to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding and had, in a sort of way, been refused by him.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope’s wicked, cunning hand had been peculiarly conspicuous in the way in which this had been brought to pass, and it was the success of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope’s cunning which was so painfully grating to the feelings of the archdeacon. That which of all things he most dreaded was that he should be outgeneralled by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope; and just at present it appeared probable that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope would turn his flank, steal a march on him, cut off his provisions, carry his strong town by a <i xml:lang="fr">coup de main</i>, and at last beat him thoroughly in a regular pitched battle. The archdeacon felt that his flank had been turned when desired to wait on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope instead of the bishop, that a march had been stolen when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding was induced to refuse the bishop’s offer, that his provisions would be cut off when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quiverful got the hospital, that Eleanor was the strong town doomed to be taken, and that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope, as Dean of Barchester, would be regarded by all the world as conqueror in the final conflict.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne was the <i xml:lang="la">Deus ex machina</i> who was to come down upon the Barchester stage and bring about deliverance from these terrible evils. But how can melodramatic <i xml:lang="fr">dénouements</i> be properly brought about, how can vice and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope be punished, and virtue and the archdeacon be rewarded, while the avenging god is laid up with the gout? In the meantime evil may be triumphant, and poor innocence, transfixed to the earth by an arrow from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Proudie’s quiver, may lie dead upon the ground, not to be resuscitated even by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne.</p>
			<p>Two or three days after Eleanor’s departure, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin went to Oxford and soon found himself closeted with the august head of his college. It was quite clear that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne was not very sanguine as to the effects of his journey to Barchester, and not overanxious to interfere with the bishop. He had had the gout, but was very nearly convalescent, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin at once saw that had the mission been one of which the master thoroughly approved, he would before this have been at Plumstead.</p>
			<p>As it was, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne was resolved on visiting his friend, and willingly promised to return to Barchester with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin. He could not bring himself to believe that there was any probability that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope would be made Dean of Barchester. Rumour, he said, had reached even his ears, not at all favourable to that gentleman’s character, and he expressed himself strongly of opinion that any such appointment was quite out of the question. At this stage of the proceedings, the master’s right-hand man, Tom Staple, was called in to assist at the conference. Tom Staple was the Tutor of Lazarus and, moreover, a great man at Oxford. Though universally known by a species of nomenclature so very undignified, Tom Staple was one who maintained a high dignity in the university. He was, as it were, the leader of the Oxford tutors, a body of men who consider themselves collectively as being by very little, if at all, second in importance to the heads themselves. It is not always the case that the master, or warden, or provost, or principal can hit it off exactly with his tutor. A tutor is by no means indisposed to have a will of his own. But at Lazarus they were great friends and firm allies at the time of which we are writing.</p>
			<p>Tom Staple was a hale, strong man of about forty-five, short in stature, swarthy in face, with strong, sturdy black hair and crisp black beard of which very little was allowed to show itself in shape of whiskers. He always wore a white neckcloth, clean indeed, but not tied with that scrupulous care which now distinguishes some of our younger clergy. He was, of course, always clothed in a seemly suit of solemn black. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Staple was a decent cleanly liver, not over-addicted to any sensuality; but nevertheless a somewhat warmish hue was beginning to adorn his nose, the peculiar effect, as his friends averred, of a certain pipe of port introduced into the cellars of Lazarus the very same year in which the tutor entered it as a freshman. There was also, perhaps, a little redolence of port wine, as it were the slightest possible twang, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Staple’s voice.</p>
			<p>In these latter days Tom Staple was not a happy man; university reform had long been his bugbear, and now was his bane. It was not with him, as with most others, an affair of politics, respecting which, when the need existed, he could, for parties’ sake or on behalf of principle, maintain a certain amount of necessary zeal; it was not with him a subject for dilettante warfare and courteous, commonplace opposition. To him it was life and death. The status quo of the university was his only idea of life, and any reformation was as bad to him as death. He would willingly have been a martyr in the cause, had the cause admitted of martyrdom.</p>
			<p>At the present day, unfortunately, public affairs will allow of no martyrs, and therefore it is that there is such a deficiency of zeal. Could gentlemen of £10,000 a year have died on their own doorsteps in defence of protection, no doubt some half-dozen glorious old baronets would have so fallen, and the school of protection would at this day have been crowded with scholars. Who can fight strenuously in any combat in which there is no danger? Tom Staple would have willingly been impaled before a Committee of the House, could he by such self-sacrifice have infused his own spirit into the component members of the hebdomadal board.</p>
			<p>Tom Staple was one of those who in his heart approved of the credit system which had of old been in vogue between the students and tradesmen of the university. He knew and acknowledged to himself that it was useless in these degenerate days publicly to contend with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Jupiter</i> on such a subject. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Jupiter</i> had undertaken to rule the university, and Tom Staple was well aware that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Jupiter</i> was too powerful for him. But in secret, and among his safe companions, he would argue that the system of credit was an ordeal good for young men to undergo.</p>
			<p>The bad men, said he, the weak and worthless, blunder into danger and burn their feet; but the good men, they who have any character, they who have that within them which can reflect credit on their alma mater, they come through scatheless. What merit will there be to a young man to get through safely, if he be guarded and protected and restrained like a schoolboy? By so doing, the period of the ordeal is only postponed, and the manhood of the man will be deferred from the age of twenty to that of twenty-four. If you bind him with leading-strings at college, he will break loose while eating for the bar in London; bind him there, and he will break loose afterwards, when he is a married man. The wild oats must be sown somewhere. ’Twas thus that Tom Staple would argue of young men, not, indeed, with much consistency, but still with some practical knowledge of the subject gathered from long experience.</p>
			<p>And now Tom Staple proffered such wisdom as he had for the assistance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin.</p>
			<p>“Quite out of the question,” said he, arguing that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope could not possibly be made the new Dean of Barchester.</p>
			<p>“So I think,” said the master. “He has no standing, and, if all I hear be true, very little character.”</p>
			<p>“As to character,” said Tom Staple, “I don’t think much of that. They rather like loose parsons for deans; a little fast living, or a dash of infidelity, is no bad recommendation to a cathedral close. But they couldn’t make <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope; the last two deans have been Cambridge men; you’ll not show me an instance of their making three men running from the same university. We don’t get our share and never shall, I suppose, but we must at least have one out of three.”</p>
			<p>“Those sort of rules are all gone by now,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin.</p>
			<p>“Everything has gone by, I believe,” said Tom Staple. “The cigar has been smoked out, and we are the ashes.”</p>
			<p>“Speak for yourself, Staple,” said the master.</p>
			<p>“I speak for all,” said the tutor stoutly. “It is coming to that, that there will be no life left anywhere in the country. No one is any longer fit to rule himself, or those belonging to him. The Government is to find us all in everything, and the press is to find the Government. Nevertheless, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope won’t be Dean of Barchester.”</p>
			<p>“And who will be warden of the hospital?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin.</p>
			<p>“I hear that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quiverful is already appointed,” said Tom Staple.</p>
			<p>“I think not,” said the master. “And I think, moreover, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Proudie will not be so shortsighted as to run against such a rock: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope should himself have sense enough to prevent it.”</p>
			<p>“But perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope may have no objection to see his patron on a rock,” said the suspicious tutor.</p>
			<p>“What could he get by that?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin.</p>
			<p>“It is impossible to see the doubles of such a man,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Staple. “It seems quite clear that Bishop Proudie is altogether in his hands, and it is equally clear that he has been moving heaven and earth to get this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Quiverful into the hospital, although he must know that such an appointment would be most damaging to the bishop. It is impossible to understand such a man, and dreadful to think,” added Tom Staple, sighing deeply, “that the welfare and fortunes of good men may depend on his intrigues.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Staple were not in the least aware, nor even was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin, that this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Slope, of whom they were talking, had been using his utmost efforts to put their own candidate into the hospital, and that in lieu of being permanent in the palace, his own expulsion therefrom had been already decided on by the high powers of the diocese.</p>
			<p>“I’ll tell you what,” said the tutor, “if this Quiverful is thrust into the hospital and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Trefoil does die, I should not wonder if the Government were to make <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding Dean of Barchester. They would feel bound to do something for him after all that was said when he resigned.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne at the moment made no reply to this suggestion, but it did not the less impress itself on his mind. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harding could not be warden of the hospital, why should he not be Dean of Barchester?</p>
			<p>And so the conference ended without any very fixed resolution, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Gwynne and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Arabin prepared for their journey to Plumstead on the morrow.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
